feat: ✨ post on using Python for data engineering (#280)
seedcase-project/decisions: why-python-for-data-engineering/index.qmd

---
title: "Why Python for data engineering"
description: |
  Our core, value-driven work revolves around engineering data in various ways

>   and developing data into data packages.  This decision post explains why we

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  and developing data into data packages. This decision post explains why we
```

  use Python for building data packages and for developing libraries of common
  functionalities that simplify building data packages.
date: "2026-06-01"
categories:
  - develop
  - process
  - script
---

## Context and problem statement

Our core, [stream-aligned](https://teamtopologies.com/key-concepts) work is
creating, building, and continually developing data packages. Our data
engineering tasks revolve around designing, building, and processing data from

> various uncleaned sources into a final, structured and tidied data package. This

Reviewer: ```suggestion
various unclean sources into a final, structured and tidied data package. This
```

data package can then be used for research analysis. Using an effective and
powerful language can greatly simplify this type of work.

We [previously decided](/why-python/index.qmd) to use Python for both data
engineering work as well as for developing all of our software tools, which
meant we compared languages that could do both of those things rather than just
one of them. However, our needs for building software tools have changed,
especially as we've started to build more command-line and web-based tools.
Because of this, we reconsidered Python for building software tools, and instead
[switched to Rust](/why-rust-for-building-software/index.qmd). However, we still
need a language suitable for data engineering and with this narrower focus, we
can ask the question:

*Which programming language is best suited for data engineering work, including

> for building libraries to support that work?*.

Author: ```suggestion
*Which programming language is best suited for data engineering work, including
to build libraries to support that work?*.
```

range of languages, even if they weren't very well suited for data engineering.
For example, we compared Java and C++ alongside R and Python. For this decision
post, we are focusing firmly on languages designed for data engineering as well
as with decent capabilities for building library packages to simplify that data
engineering work. Based on our drivers and this focus, we are only comparing two
languages:

- [R](https://www.r-project.org/)
- [Python](https://www.python.org/)

There are other languages that match some of our drivers but not all of them:

- [SQL](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/SQL) is a powerful language for data
  engineering and processing. However, it is not a general-purpose programming
  language and doesn't have the capabilities for building library packages to
  support data engineering work, so we are excluding it from consideration.
- [Scala](https://www.scala-lang.org) is a commonly used language in data
  engineering, but is nearly unknown in data science and the research community.
- [Julia](https://julialang.org/) is a fairly new language that is mainly
  designed for data science, with powerful data engineering capabilities. But it

>   isn't very popular nor widely adopted. It's primary aim is on mathematical

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  isn't very popular or widely adopted. Its primary aim is mathematical
```

  computation and statistical analysis rather than data engineering tasks.

While we decided on using [Rust for building software
tools](/why-rust-for-building-software/index.qmd), we are not considering it for
data engineering work. While the software tools we build are used for data
engineering purposes, they themselves don't do the data engineering work. This
post is about using a language for the data engineering work itself, which is
different from building software tools that support that work. These are some
reasons why we don't consider Rust:

- It isn't widely used in the data science and data engineering communities.
- There isn't yet a strong ecosystem of library packages for data engineering
  work (aside from [Polars](https://www.pola.rs/)).
- Rust is a lower-level language with high-level ergonomics, with strict and
  enforced types and a memory ownership model. These features all require

>   substantially more and deeper knowledge on how computers operate compared to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  substantially more and deeper knowledge of how computers operate compared to
```

  other languages like Python and R. For developing robust software, these are
  all good things. But for noncritical data engineering tasks that don't need
  high performance features, these extra features and restrictions make it
  difficult to write code to build up data packages quickly and effectively. It
  also doesn't have a
  [REPL](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Read%E2%80%93eval%E2%80%93print_loop),

>   which makes data engineering tasks interactive and easier to do iterative

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  which makes data engineering tasks interactive and supports iterative
```

- There are amazing and beginner-friendly data processing and analysis tools in
  R via the [tidyverse](https://tidyverse.org/), which provides a consistent and
  user-friendly interface to most data engineering tasks (like the tools
  mentioned above).
- It has an effective and powerful library package development system that makes
  it easy to quickly build and share packages.
- It has an extremely flexible programming environment, where there are few
  rules on how things are done. It was designed in a way to do analysis
  interactively in the R console, rather than to write scripts that are run from
  start to finish. This means it is very easy to get started, write code that
  works, and get stuff done quickly.
:::::

::::: column
#### Drawbacks

- Package dependency management isn't really built into the language, so pinning
  specific versions of packages used is quite difficult and depends on external
  tools like [renv](https://rstudio.github.io/renv/) (which itself has a number
  of limitations).
- Is not as commonly used within the data engineering community, likely because
  it mainly came from statistics and analysis, rather than from data
  engineering.

> - It isn't as well-designed for building packages compared to other languages,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- It isn't as well designed for building packages as some other languages,
```

>   though is fairly similar to Python in this case (similar but different, see

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  though it is fairly similar to Python in this respect (similar but different, see
```

  Python's drawbacks). For example, it doesn't have the capability to integrate
  continuous delivery processes for distributing packages. Nor are the checks
  that CRAN (the package registry) uses publicly available, which makes it very
  difficult to build packages that pass the CRAN checks without first uploading
  the package to their system and having them run their checks.

> - Running local CRAN checks (which aren't the exact same as the official checks)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Running local CRAN checks (which aren't exactly the same as the official checks)
```

  different ways) in this regard, as they are both flexible. See Python's
  drawbacks below.
:::::
:::

### Python

[Python](https://www.python.org/) is an interpreted, high-level, general-purpose
programming language. Python's design philosophy emphasizes code readability,
for example by using whitespace as part of its syntax. Its language uses an
object-oriented approach and is often quoted as being ["the second-best language
for everything"](https://sixfeetup.com/blog/4-reasons-to-choose-python) and the
["glue"](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Python_(programming_language)) between
other languages and environments. This means that it can do a lot of different
things, even if it doesn't do any one of those things well. This makes it a
flexible language to do a wide variety of tasks in.

::: columns
::::: column
#### Benefits

- It has a massive community with a large number of packages for many different
  programming tasks, including data engineering tasks.
- It is widely used in the data science, machine learning, and data engineering
  communities.
- Many tools have some bindings or connections into Python. For example, SQL

>   databases can be easily connected into Python with packages like

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Many tools have some bindings or connections to Python. For example, SQL
  databases can be easily connected to Python with packages like
```
?

  [SQLAlchemy](https://www.sqlalchemy.org/), and many data engineering tools
  have Python bindings, such as [Arrow](https://arrow.apache.org/),
  [DuckDB](https://duckdb.org/), [Spark](https://spark.apache.org/), and
  [Polars](https://www.pola.rs/).
- It has packages for easily connecting to different sources, such as web APIs
  and other programming languages.
- It has a lot of programming features from different paradigms, which means it
  is flexible in how it can be used and written.
- Like R, it is dynamically typed, which means you don't need to worry about
  types when writing code, so it can be easy to write something that (at least

>   seems to) work and get stuff done quickly.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  seems to) works and get stuff done quickly.
```

  outputs something.
- While there are lots of packages to help with package development, it is still
  a fragmented ecosystem and experience for building packages, even when
  compared to R.
- Its multiparadigm nature is also a drawback, as it can lead to a lot of
  different ways to do the same thing and it doesn't implement any one of those
  paradigms very well. So the coding experience can feel a bit fragmented,
  especially when trying to use different packages that use different paradigms.
:::::
:::

## Decision outcome

While both R and Python provide a lot of power and are similarly capable of
doing both data engineering work and building library packages to support that
work, we've decided to use Python. One of the two main reasons is that Python is
more widely used in the data engineering community, so it will (over time) have
a stronger ecosystem of tools for data engineering. The other reason is that
Python's package development experience, while not great, is better than R's
experience. This is primarily because of the tools now available, like uv, and
because it is much easier to distribute packages through PyPI than through R's

> CRAN system (even if the CRAN system might ensure higher quality packages

Reviewer: ```suggestion
CRAN system (even if the CRAN system might ensure higher-quality packages
```
